# Eye For Blind 👁️‍🗨️

### Problem Statement:

In this project, the objective is to create a deep learning model capable of explaining the contents of an image in the form of speech through caption generation. This model will utilize an attention mechanism and be trained on the Flickr8K dataset. The aim is to develop a solution catered towards aiding visually impaired individuals, allowing them to comprehend images through speech-generated captions.

This application involves a combination of deep learning and natural language processing techniques. The features of an image will be extracted by a convolutional neural network (CNN)-based encoder, and these features will then be decoded by a recurrent neural network (RNN) model to generate captions.

The project is an extension of the "Show, Attend and Tell: Neural Image Caption Generation with Visual Attention" paper, which introduced the concept of incorporating visual attention mechanisms into image captioning models.

### Dataset:

The dataset (Flickr8K) is sourced from Kaggle and consists of sentence-based image descriptions. It comprises a collection of 8,000 images, each paired with five different captions. These captions provide clear descriptions of the salient entities and events depicted in the images.

## Conclusion

- We limited the training to 20 epochs only, as the primary goal was not to build a state-of-the-art model but rather to explore the integration of the attention mechanism with the Encoder-Decoder architecture for image processing.

- To evaluate the performance of our model, we utilized the BLEU Score, a measure of caption quality. Through testing different combinations of weights, our model consistently achieved the maximum BLEU Score (100%), indicating its reliability across various setups.

- Caption predictions were generated by calculating the likelihood of each word in our vocabulary. Employing Greedy Search, we selected the word with the highest likelihood at each step, ensuring the coherence and sensibility of our captions.

### Demo Link:
<a href="https://huggingface.co/spaces/krishnapal2308/eye_for_blind" target="_blank">View Demo</a>
